PMM-12251 Service Accounts. (#1225)
percona/pmm-doc: docs/api/authentication.md

# Service accounts authentication

!!! caution alert alert-warning "Important"
    API keys are deprecated now. During update to version PMM v3 all of them you be converted into Service Accounts with Service Token. In such case API key persist same, but it is just covnerted into Service Token.

Service accounts are used to control access to the PMM server components and resources. With an API key, you are authenticated to the PMM server, have access to PMM server components and resources, and perform various actions on them. You can use Service accounts as a replacement for basic authentication and API keys.

> Service account contains Service Tokens, which is direct replacement for API key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ##  Generate Service Token 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##  Generate a service account and token 
```

> PMM uses the Grafana Service Token for authentication. Following are the steps to generate the Service Token:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PMM uses the Grafana Service Account Tokens for authentication. A token is a generated random string that acts as an alternative to a API passwords.

Here's how to generate a Service Account Token:
```

Reviewer: do we need to any any prerequisites here? What permissions are required for generating tokens?

1. Login to PMM.

> 2. From the side menu, click *Administration → Users and access*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. From the side menu, click **Administration > Users and access**.
```

> 3. On the next page, click *Service accounts*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Click on the **Service accounts** card.
```

> 4. *Add Service Account* dialog box opens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Click **Add service account**.
```

5. Enter  the following to generate an Service account:
    - Service Account name (you can give any desired name)
    - Select the Role from the drop-down 
    - Click Add.
6. *Service Account Updated* window displays your newly created Service Account.
7. Click *Add Service Account Token*.

> 8. Enter name for Service Token, or left input empty to generate name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Provide a name for the new service token, or leave the field empty to generate an automatic name.
```

> 9. In same dialog choose also "Expiration" for Service Token. Options are: "No expiration" or "Choose expiration date".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9. (Recommended) Select the  **Set expiration date** option and specify how long you want the key to be valid.
```

> 10. Once you are done click on "Generate Token".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
10. Click **Generate Token**. A pop-up window will display the new token, which usually has a  "glsa_" prefix. 
```

> 11. Your Service Token hash just prompt up on your screen. It usually has prefix: "glsa_".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 12. Copy your Service Token to clipboard and save it on secure place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
12. Copy your service token to the clipboard and store it securely.
```

> 13. Now you can use your new Service Token for authentication in PMM API calls (or in your PMM agent config).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can utilize your new service token for authentication in PMM API calls or in your PMM Agent configuration.
```

With service accounts, you can:

- control access to PMM Server components and resources.
- define granular permissions for various actions.
- create and manage multiple access tokens for a single service account.

Creating multiple tokens for the same service account is beneficial in the following scenarios:

- when multiple applications require the same permissions but need to be audited or managed separately. By assigning each application its own token, you can track and control their actions individually.
- when a token becomes compromised and needs to be replaced. Instead of revoking the entire service account, you can rotate or replace the affected token without disrupting other applications using the same service account.
- when you want to implement token lifecycle management. You can set expiration dates for individual tokens, ensuring that they are regularly rotated and reducing the risk of unauthorized access.

## Generate a service account and token

> PMM uses the Grafana service account tokens for authentication. A token is a generated random string that acts as an alternative to API passwords.

Author: API keys or basic auth passwords

Reviewer: PMM uses Grafana service account tokens for authentication. These tokens are randomly generated strings that serve as alternatives to API keys or basic authentication passwords.

    Use the `-k` or `--insecure` parameter to force cURL to ignore invalid and self-signed SSL certificate errors. The option will skip the SSL verification process, and you can bypass any SSL errors while still having SSL-encrypted communication. However, using the `--insecure`  parameter is not recommended. Although the data transfer is encrypted, it is not entirely secure. For enhanced security of your PMM installation, you need valid SSL certificates. For information on validating SSL certificates, refer to: [SSL certificates](../how-to/secure.md).

```sh
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer <service_token>" https://127.0.0.1/v1/version
```

> ## Use an Service Token in basic auth

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use a service token in basic authentication
```

> You can pass the Service Token into a REST API call as a query parameter in the following format. Replace `SERVICE_TOKEN` with your Service Token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can include the service token as a query parameter in a REST API call using the following format. Replace YOUR_SERVICE_TOKEN with the actual service token you obtained in step 12.

```

**Example**

```sh
curl -X GET https://service_token:SERVICE_TOKEN@localhost/v1/version
```

> ## Use an Service Token in Bearer auth (HTTP header)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use a service token in Bearer authentication (HTTP header)
```

> You can also pass Service Token into header of HTTP request. Replace `SERVICE_TOKEN` with your Service Token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also include the service token in the header of an HTTP request for authentication. To do this, replace `SERVICE_TOKEN` with the actual service token you obtained in step 12.
```
